ADR 005: modular server (#8222)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: docs/architecture/adr-005-modular-server.md

without forking the application `start` command (eg: `<app>d start`).

This modularity and extensibility relies on the following limitations:

    - Consistent services
    - Configuration extensibility

### Consistent services

The `start` command executes 3 steps for each of the services provided by an SDK
application server:

    1. Creation of the service
    2. Registration of the services directly with the server
    3. Start/Stop the service process
  
In the current implementation, [some services](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/f9dc082059d63423f96315ff913a8745c3178a7d/server/grpc/server.go#L14-L42) wrap these steps together in a single function, while
[others](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/f9dc082059d63423f96315ff913a8745c3178a7d/server/api/server.go#L81-L119) implement them as separate functions as the ones above. The lack of a standard approach for
these steps results in difficulty for extensibility as each of these functions are individually
called by the `start` command after checking if the service is enabled or not by the configuration.

### Configuration extensibility

> Each service relies on the configuration options defined on `config.tml`. Thus, in order to extend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each service relies on the configuration options defined on `app.toml`. Thus, in order to extend
```

[others](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/f9dc082059d63423f96315ff913a8745c3178a7d/server/api/server.go#L81-L119) implement them as separate functions as the ones above. The lack of a standard approach for
these steps results in difficulty for extensibility as each of these functions are individually
called by the `start` command after checking if the service is enabled or not by the configuration.

### App configuration extensibility

Each service relies on the configuration options defined on `app.toml`. Thus, in order to extend
the services provided by the server, the SDK must handle custom TOML files provided by each
application.

## Decision

The proposed approach standardizes the server and service setup process. 
To accomplish this a new `Service` and `Server` interface will be introduced based on the 3 steps outlined above:

```go
type Service interface {
    RegisterRoutes() bool
    Start(config.ServerConfig) error
    Stop() error
}

type Server interface {
    GetServices() []Service

>     RegisterServices() error

Reviewer 2: shouldn't `RegisterServices` take Services as an argument?

Reviewer 3: I guess the implementation provided by the client code embeds the list of services?

    GetSDKConfig() *Config
}
```

### Start Command

```go
func startInProcess(ctx *Context, clientCtx client.Context, appCreator types.AppCreator) error {
  // ...
  app := appCreator(ctx.Logger, db, traceWriter, ctx.Viper)

  // handle application-specific configuration
  cfg := app.GetConfig(ctx.Viper)
  // ...

  // 1. Create application-specific server
  server := app.NewServer(clientCtx, ctx.Logger, cfg)

  // 2. Register routes from each service 
  // NOTE: routes are registered regardless if the service is enabled or not
  if err := server.RegisterServices(); err != nil {
    return err
  }

  // 3. Start each of the services.
  // NOTE: each service must check if it's enabled via the configuration
  if err := server.Start(cfg); err != nil {
    return err
  }

  defer func() {
    // ...
    // stop all the services
    if err := server.Stop(); err != nil {
      ctx.Logger.Error("failed to stop server", "error", err)
    }
    // ...
  }
  // ...
}
```

## Consequences

### Positive

- Standardize all the services provided by the SDK
- Modularize the server so that it allows for custom application-specific services.

> ### Negative

Reviewer 4: I would add
 
- more modularity adds more of a maintenance burden. 
- Can lead to user mistakes in registration and/or server configuration

Love the approach being taken but too much configuration like this can lead to many user mistakes. I believe the sdk should be opinionated in this category to help prevent user errores

> # ADR 005: Modular Server

Reviewer 2: There was a gap - 005 didn't exist before?

Author: yeah it didn't exist

## Changelog

- 2020/12/22: Initial Draft

## Author

- Federico Kunze ([@fedekunze](https://github.com/fedekunze))

## Status

Draft, Not Implemented

## Abstract

> This document outlines a modular and standard approach for using servers on the SDK, so that

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This document outlines a modular and standard approach for using servers built using the Cosmos SDK, so that
```

applications can also run custom services besides the default ones provided by the SDK.

## Context

The current `Server` implementation allows for applications to register routes, API and gRPC

> services to the SDK. The problem with the current approach is that the SDK uses a concrete type,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
services via the SDK. The problem with the current approach is that the SDK uses a concrete type,
```

which prevents other SDK-based blockchains to extend the services provided by the application
without forking the application `start` command (eg: `<app>d start`).

This modularity and extensibility relies on the following limitations:

>     - Consistent services
>     - App configuration extensibility

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Consistent services
- App configuration extensibility
```

> ### Consistent services

Reviewer 2: How about renaming to: _Service setup_? Or _Service Registration Process_,   _Consisten Service Registration_...

The `start` command executes 3 steps for each of the in-process services provided by an SDK
application server:

>     1. Creation of the service
>     2. Registration of the services directly with the server
>     3. Start/Stop the service process

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Creation of the service
2. Registration of the services directly with the server
3. Start/Stop the service process
```

  
In the current implementation, [some services](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/f9dc082059d63423f96315ff913a8745c3178a7d/server/grpc/server.go#L14-L42) wrap these steps together in a single function, while
[others](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/f9dc082059d63423f96315ff913a8745c3178a7d/server/api/server.go#L81-L119) implement them as separate functions as the ones above. The lack of a standard approach for
these steps results in difficulty for extensibility as each of these functions are individually
called by the `start` command after checking if the service is enabled or not by the configuration.

### App configuration extensibility

Each service relies on the configuration options defined on `app.toml`. Thus, in order to extend
the services provided by the server, the SDK must handle custom TOML files provided by each

> application.

Reviewer 2: If we fork a service, then we don't need to create a new config file. Same, if we are able to extend Server / service in a way to configure which services are registered. So, we can keep all configuration in `app.toml`. The problem is to manage properly which services are registered in server, right?

## Decision

> The proposed approach standardizes the server and its services, so that the app start clearly states
> the 3 steps outlined above. To accomplish this a new `Service` and `Server` interface will be
> introduced:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The proposed approach standardizes the server and service setup process. 
To accomplish this a new `Service` and `Server` interface will be introduced based on the 3 steps outlined above:
```

```go
type Service interface {
    RegisterRoutes() bool
    Start(config.ServerConfig) error
    Stop() error
}

type Server interface {
    GetServices() []Service
    RegisterServices() error
    Start(config.ServerConfig) error
    Stop() error
}
```

### Configuration

Since the enablement of a service depends on the application configuration, an additional
`ServerConfig` interface is required so that the current configuration utility functions are still
applicable for the SDK and extensible concrete configurations:

```go
// ServerConfig extends the SDK default configuration TOML
type ServerConfig interface {
    // The SDK config defines the 5 configurations used by default: Base, Telemetry, API, gRPC and State Sync. 

>     GetSDKConfig() *Config

Reviewer 5: What is `*Config`?

}
```

### Start Command

```go
func startInProcess(ctx *Context, clientCtx client.Context, appCreator types.AppCreator) error {
  // ...
  app := appCreator(ctx.Logger, db, traceWriter, ctx.Viper)

  // handle application-specific configuration
  cfg := app.GetConfig(ctx.Viper)
  // ...

  // 1. Create application-specific server

>   server := app.NewServer(clientCtx, ctx.Logger, cfg)

Reviewer 5: `NewServer` is not defined.

  // 2. Register routes from each service 
  // NOTE: routes are registered regardless if the service is enabled or not
  if err := server.RegisterServices(); err != nil {
    return err
  }

  // 3. Start each of the services.
  // NOTE: each service must check if it's enabled via the configuration
  if err := server.Start(cfg); err != nil {
    return err
  }

  defer func() {
    // ...
    // stop all the services
    if err := server.Stop(); err != nil {
      ctx.Logger.Error("failed to stop server", "error", err)
    }
    // ...
  }
  // ...
}
```

## Consequences

> > This section describes the resulting context, after applying the decision. All consequences should be listed here, not just the "positive" ones. A particular decision may have positive, negative, and neutral consequences, but all of them affect the team and project in the future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

### Positive

> - Standardize all the services provided by the SDK

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Standardize service setup process
```

- Modularize the server so that it allows for custom application-specific services.

### Negative

- Breaking changes to the server and configuration

### Neutral

- Refactor of existing and work-in-progress services (gRPC, Rosetta, etc).

### Backwards Compatibility

> > All ADRs that introduce backwards incompatibilities must include a section describing these incompatibilities and their severity. The ADR must explain how the author proposes to deal with these incompatibilities. ADR submissions without a sufficient backwards compatibility treatise may be rejected outright.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
